title: Actually, People Love Predictable Change
author: Mark Nijhof
published: true

I just read an interesting post by Tim Kastelle claiming that [Actually, People Love Change](http://timkastelle.org/blog/2012/11/actually-people-love-change/). In his post he has some interesting points but I am thinking that he may be oversimplifying the experiment a little bit.

I think that predictable change is something that people love, f.ex. the questions Tim asked were not really radical in itself.

Getting married is a very predictable event and change -at least that is what we expect- many people around us do it and we can see the results of it. The same goes for getting children. You know what you are getting into -who are we kidding here, really- but again it is not something radically different. Actually these things are very accepted and even expected -right mom- changes. So because we see it all around us it becomes a much more predictable change, even though they are huge changes by themselves.

Now about changing jobs; I think this also has a lot to do with the people Tim asked. In our industry it is expected that you switch between jobs, it increases your knowledge and experience. I.e. it makes you more valuable. It also is very easy to change jobs, actually changing a job is not that much of a change. Most often you would be doing very similar work, yes there would be different people and a different location, but nothing radically changed.

Moving to a different city is also not that hard for people in our industry, we can pretty much find the same type of work where ever we live. Being able to work and get an income is a very reassuring thing to have, making the change of location much less scary. So changing cities becomes much more predictable if you already know of have a job that you feel comfortable doing. 

Now moving between countries is a much bigger change and I was surprised to read that half of his audience had indeed done that. So I was curious were Tim lived or held the speech. Things became a lot clearer when I saw most of his work is done in Australia. I love that country, _many_ other people love that country, so no surprise that many people have moved there. Especially from our industry because we actually can get a visa. 

Now only expecting your life to improve by moving to a different country is in my encounter with many people not enough for them to take the step. I have met many people that told me they would have loved to live in country X, but never took the plunge.

Now I believe better questions to ask would have been in the form of:

- How many people have moved to a different country where they didn't speak the language?
- How many people have actually changed the type of work they did while changing jobs?
- How many people tried food from a very different culture?

